Ultima I


                                    Ultima I
                           The First Age of Darkness





                                 The Adventure

        Hail, Noble One!  Our land is in need of a stalwart hero, one who
    will brave perils too horrific to consider.  A plague has be-fallen the
    Realm, a scourge is upon the land!  Our villages lie sacked, ruinous
    mounds of ashes where once trod peasants stout of heart and sound of
    mind, where once lay fields of grain and fruit, where kine and fowl
    grew fat upon the bounties of our fair Sosaria.  All manner of wicked
    and vile creatures prey upon our people and ravage the land.  'Tis the
    doing of one so evil that the very earth trembles at the mention of his
    name.

        Mondain the Wizard hath wrought his malice well.  Our nobles bicker
    amongst themselves, and each hath retired to the confines of his keep
    in hopes of watching the downfall of his rivals.  Verily, the Evil One
    hat heaped indignity upon curse by releasing upon the Realm a host of
    creatures and beasts so bloodthirsty and wicked that our defenseless
    people fall as grain before the reaper's scythe.

        These denizens of the underworld hold sway over all that can be
    surveyed, save for the strongholds of the nobles besotted with their
    own ambition.  Nowhere in our once peaceful country may a traveler find
    safe passage or lodging, save in the keeps of the self-proclaimed
    kings-and they demand hard labors for their indulgences.

        Only the young Lord British remains steadfast in the vision of a
    peaceful and united Sosaria.  In his castle and his towne the pure of
    heart will find an ally and replenishment for the needs of one who hath
    chosen to fight for the Realm.

        Aid us in ridding our land of the scourge that hath befallen us, O
    Noble One.  We beseech thee, for without thine aid we shall surely
    perish before the onslaught of the maleficent necromancer.  Slay the
    evil Mondain!

                                   Fellowship

        The lands of Sosaria are populated by a diversity of races as
    varied as the elements.  From the tiniest Bobbit to the most towering
    human, our folk show a strength of character unknown in other parts of
    the world.  Until the coming of the foul Mondain , our folk lived in
    harmony and worked together in the true spirit of comrade-ship.  The
    principal inhabitants of Sosaria are:

    Human:  Endowed with a natural intellect higher than any other race,
            the humans are the backbone of Sosarian society.  Found in all
            walks of life, they are strong of body and of unexcelled
            spirit.

    Elf:  Shorter than their human counterparts by the span of three hands,
          the elves of Sosaria are slight of build and swift of movement.
          Their superior natural agility makes them excellent musicians and
          clever thieves.  At home amongst the trees of the deepest forest
          or in the alleyways of the capital, the Sosarian Elf makes a
          stalwart companion and a relentless foe.



    Dwarf:  Mountain fold and legendary miners, the dwarves of Sosaria
            stand but half a human's height, yet often outweigh slender
            elves.  They are matchless in courage and possess and
            inordinate endowment of natural strength.  Never accept the
            Sosarian Dwarf's challenge to wrestle for drinks in a tavern,
            unless thy supply of gold be endless and thy generosity ample.

    Bobbit:  A small and gentle race, the Sosarian Bobbits are believed to
             have come to our Realm from a distant place.  They are said to
             favour mountainside meadows and the serenity of forest
             clearings.  Their diminutive height being even less than that
             of a dwarf, they shun any task that involves hard, physical
             labour, preferring instead to pursuits of study and
             contemplation.  Bobbits are naturally weak, yet possess a
             serenity indicative of profound wisdom.

                                  Professions

    Whilst the professions practiced by our folk are numerous, there are
    but four courses of action that may be followed by the novice
    adventurer.  These are:

    Fighter - The rigorous training involved in learning to become a
              fighter results in a stronger, more agile adventurer.  The
              knowledge acquired during this period permits the fighter to
              use virtually every kind of weapon that might be found in
              Sosaria.

    Cleric -  A profession suited to those who are of an introspective
              nature, the study of the ways of the cleric requires patience
              and results in a good deal of wisdom.  Such is their calm and
              concentration that at no time will the proper spell cast by a
              cleric fail to attain its desired result.

    Wizard - To become a wizard in our Realm, one must study long and
             diligently, poring over ancient writings and dusty tomes.
             Mastery of the arcane arts comes not easily, yet such training
             hones the intellect to a superior edge!  The fruits of the
             long years of discipline are deemed to be worth the effort,
             however, for only the wizard may purchase the necessary
             supplies for the casting of the more powerful enchantments.

    Thief - Whilst not a profession held in the highest esteem among those
            charged with maintaining the public order, thieving is a trade
            that often serves the adventurer well.  Many of the explorer's
            finds are guarded by clever and devious traps that require
            nimble fingers and a dexterous hand.  Larceny and the opening
            of locks comes much easier for the thief than for other
            mortals, for they who follow this occupation are endowed with
            exceptional agility.



                                Castles & Townes

        Sosaria is a land dotted with the castles of the nobility of the
    Realm and with numerous townes wherein the traveler might purchase
    supplies and provender.  Townes and castles may be entered freely, but
    woe to the one who foolishly is apprehended in an act of thievery, for
    the public order is maintained here by burly Guards who fear none.

    Each castle is held by a noble, the King of his particular region.
    Visit these local rulers, they have much to offer the adventurer.  The
    castles are often built of stone and peopled with merchants, courtiers,
    guards and fools.  Beware of the jesters , for although they amuse,
    they may also deceive.

                                Shoppes

        The merchant class of Sosaria is the mainstay of the Realm's
    economy.  All manner of trade goods - foodstuffs and the handiwork of
    local artisans - can be found in the towne and castle shoppes.  An
    adequate supply of gold will help to equip the adventurer with
    everything from rations to the most esoteric of weapons.  Some of the
    more common emporiums include:

    Armoury - The tailors of protective garments await your pleasure in the
              armouries of Sosaria.  The finest craftsmen in the Realm will
              swiftly fit out the adventurer in a suit made of worked
              leather or metal.  Price varies according to the level of
              protection offered by the suit of armour.

    Weapons - The workers of metal in Sosaria know no peer.  From a simple
              carved mace, reinforced with good iron, to the most
              exquisitely crafted greatswords of tempered steel, the
              weapons found in the shoppes of the Realm are truly works of
              art.  'Tis rumored that some of the arms one may find in the
              distant reaches of our land surpass belief.


    Transportation - Whilst one may travel throughout much of the Realm
              afoot, there are alternate means of transport that make short
              journeys pass more quickly, and longer journeys feasible
              where once such voyages seemed unattainable.  Common modes of
              travel include the use of horses and of sea-going vessels.
              Uncommon modes of travel are also rumoured to exist.

    Magic -   A once-forgotten discipline, the study of magic has enjoyed a
              renaissance since the coming of the evil Mondain.  Many hold
              the belief that sorcery is indeed needed to combat sorcery.
              The practitioner of the arcane arts can purchase the needed
              tools of the trade in various magic shoppes scattered
              throughout the Realm.

    Food -    None can live without sustenance.  The food shoppes of
              Sosaria provide the local populace with fresh produce and
              meats, while the adventurer can find provisions therein that
              will last for weeks in the wilderness with no special care.



    Pubs -    The people of our land are not without a certain fondness for
              strong spirits and lively companionship.  Most settlements
              are graced with public houses where a tankard of strong ale
              from the region of Trinsic or a flagon of the best Jhelom
              mead may be had for but a few coins.  Many of the people
              found in these taverns are quite friendly, and the ones
              serving the drinks are often fountains of wisdom and gossip.


                                    Dungeons
    
        Our land is an ancient one, where strange and wondrous beings once
    walked the earth and civilizations rose and fell.  There are numerous
    underground labyrinths to be found throughout Sosaria, the handiwork of
    unspeakable creatures and unknown forces.  These mazes have become the
    dwellings of many of the horrors unleashed by Mondain upon our poor
    land.  Indeed, the lowest depths of some of these hellholes contain
    creatures that make even the staunchest warriors blanch and tremble.

        Yet these subterranean passages also contain caches of the ill-
    gotten gains of the predations of Mondain's minions.  An intrepid
    adventurer can finance many an expedition with the spoils of a careful
    foray in the dungeons of Sosaria.  Hearken to my words: The use of
    extreme caution is needed when exploring underground.  The corridors of
    the dungeons are lined with the bones of explorers who overestimated
    their abilities!

                                  Starwalking

        Before the archmage Mondain can be defeated, one's mettle will
    first have to be tested in the farthest reaches of the heavens.  'Tis
    said that the Evil One has formed alliances with starwalking monsters
    of unparalleled savagery.  These malicious creatures stand poised to
    swoop down upon our people and devastate them.  The need to slay the
    vile wizard is redoubled in the face of this threat.

        Should a champion emerge from the mists of legend, the means by
    which to combat this menace from the skies will appear-so say the
    prophets.  The legends which foretell of this hero include a number of
    writings and several ballads sung by the bards of our Realm.  Among the
    more recent discoveries pertaining to the coming of the star-walkers is
    an arcane manuscript, found on the foothills of Mt. Drash.  Since it
    appears to hold instructions for the use of some form of transport, it
    has been broadcast throughout the land in hopes that it might prove
    useful to one engaged in the quest to rid Sosaria of Mondain.  The
    substance of the document is as follows:
 
        In the heavens, each vehicle has the means to control rotation, as
    well as thrust and retro (reverse thrust).  In the front view mode one
    can turn left, right climb, and dive.

            "The starways are divided into 49 sectors on a 7 x 7 grid.  In
        the top view mode one can see all within the current sector.  A
        long range scan may be obtained by use of the 'Inform' control.
        Consult the Pilot's Reference Manual for the symbols needed to
        interpret a scan.



            "One can jump to the next sector in the direction of current
        travel by using the Hyperjump capability of the vehicle.

            "Docking with starbases can be attained at any of the unused
        docking ports and should be made only at slow speeds while headed
        directly into the port opening.  A docking fee is required.  Upon
        docking, a 'Base Command' query will be issued and the pi lot is
        expected to indicate the direction toward the next vehicle that
        will be used.

            "Reentry takes place when your ship passes over the lands of
        Sosaria.  NOTE: Only the shuttle craft has heated shields.  Any
        vehicle will incinerate if it collides with a star.

            "One may encounter and engage in combat with hostile beings in
        the heavens.  Once combat has begun, the pilot cannot return to the
        top view mode until all enemy craft have been driven from the
        current sector or the pilot has chosen to hyperjump to the next
        sector.  IMPORTANT: Changing from front view mode to top view mode
        at high speeds will surely result in a fatal collision.  Be wary of
        fuel levels and shield condition.  A ship without fuel drifts
        forever and a depleted shield spells certain death."

        Our most learned scholars have translated the document into the
    common tongue of the Realm, but certain terms and phrases have no
    meaning even to the most erudite sage.  Nonetheless, such is our desire
    to be rid of the scourge of Mondain that we make this information
    available to all.

                                The Magical Arts

        As mentioned elsewhere in this manuscript, the practice of magic
    had once died out in Sosaria.  The power of the mystic tradition proved
    too corrupting for the general populace and the lords of the land
    decreed that all those dabbled in sorcery were to be banished.  'Twas
    not until the coming of Mondain the Wicked that our scholars once again
    unearthed the dusty tomes that contained the records of the once
    flourishing arcane arts, and set about to retrain adepts in the use of
    enchantments.  Our leaders realize that once the discipline of magic is
    reawakened, it shall never again be put to rest.  Such is our plight
    that even the most dreaded of the arts is laid bare to all who will try
    to learn it and who swear to use its powers to combat the spread of
    Mondain's vile influences.

        While those naturally born to the practice of sorcery, who can
    invent their own enchantments and forge new ground in the arts, have
    yet to emerge as powerful wizards in their own right, a certain
    progress has been made.  There are four artifacts avail able to the
    budding mage which will enhance the ability to weave enchantments:
    Staff, Wand, Amulet, and Triangle.  The latter is a magical sword that
    may also serve as a weapon.  Several powerful spells, which will cost
    the buyer in both gold and experience, may be purchased in the magic
    shoppes of Sosaria.



    These include:

    Blink - The ability to be physically transported a short distance while
            underground.

    Create - The ability to create a wall of magical force directly in
             front of the spellcaster.

    Destroy - The ability to remove a wall of magical force that blocks the
              spellcaster's path.

    Kill - An enchantment hurled at a foe in front of the spellcaster.  If
           successful, this cantrip will destroy the opponent.

    Ladder Down - This enchantment creates a magical ladder which permits
                  the spellcaster to descend to the next level of a
                  dungeon.

    Ladder Up - This enchantment creates a magical ladder which permits the
                spellcaster to ascend to the next level of a dungeon.

    Magic Missile - The ability to strike a foe with a blast of magical
                    force.  The more skilled and well-equipped the
                    spellcaster, the greater the damage inflicted by the
                    blast.

    Open - This spell permits the opening of coffins at no risk to the
           spellcaster by magically disarming any traps.

    Prayer - The ability, when in dire straits, to call upon one's personal
             deity in hopes of finding a way out of a pressing dilemma.
             Should be used only when the spellcaster is in serious need of
             divine aid.

    Unlock - This spell permits the opening of chests at no risk to the
             spellcaster by magically disarming any traps.



                                  The Bestiary

        The Realm of Sosaria is populated by a variety of creatures, both
    natural and unnatural.  The latter group hath been on the increase
    since the coming of the Evil One.  Through the efforts of a posterity-
    minded few, a collection of names and descriptions of the more common
    beasts hath been compiled and may be perused herein.

    Archer, Hidden -  So lacking in courage are the minions of the vile
        Mondain that his Archers only ply their trade from hiding places
        high in the treetops of the forests of Sosaria.  Their aim,
        nonetheless, is accurate and many a traveler has died with out ever
        knowing whence came the deadly rain of barbed shafts.

    Balron - Huge, leather-skinned daemon lords, the Balron are perhaps the
        most fearsome of the evil minions of Mondain.  Armed with vicious
        barbed whips and the ability to cast devastating fireballs at their
        victims, these winged scions of Hell have proved to be the nemesis
        of the flower of Sosarian knighthood.

    Bat, Giant - Although the Sosarian Giant Bat is but a dumb brute, this
        large cousin of the more common vampire bat found in other lands is
        indeed a menace to those unfortunate enough to disturb its
        subterranean slumber.  The Giant Bat lives on a diet of animal
        blood and is not averse to feasting on adventurers.

    Bear - The Hill Bear towers over the tallest human and is armed with
        saber-like claws capable of rendering even the stoutest plate
        armour in a single blow.  The species was first sighted on the
        slopes of Mt. Drash, but hath since spread throughout the land.
        These creatures are extremely ill-tempered and will attack without
        provocation.

    Carrion Creeper - These loathsome worms in habit the deeper reaches of
        most dungeons, where they feed on the corpses of any luckless
        creatures they encounter.  The numerous legs on their segmented
        bodies are equipped with small barbs that allow them to move
        quickly on walls and along corridors.  Carrion Creepers should be
        avoided at all costs.

    Cyclops - A race of belligerent, one-eyed giants, the Cyclops dwelt in
        Sosaria long before humans ever landed on these shores.  Driven
        underground many years ago, the Cyclops long to return to the
        surface and drive humans into the sea.  Beware, for they will
        attack any adventurers on sight.

    Daemon - Fierce, bat-winged horrors armed with cruel talons and barbed
        tridents, Daemons were unknown in Sosaria hitherto the advent of
        Mondain.  Drinkers of human souls, Daemons are said to relish the
        screams of tortured humans above all else.

    Dark Knight - Such is the corrupting influences of the foul Mondain
        that even the most virtuous of Sosarian chivalry are subject to
        fall under his sway.  The land is now befouled with Dark Knights-
        predatory warriors who seek to waylay innocent travelers and to rob
        them of their hard-earned goods.



    Dragon Turtle - These fire-breathing, aquatic dragons inhabit the seas
        around Sosaria and are considered an even greater menace to
        mariners than the winds of a typhoon.  They are protected by a
        shell tougher than enchanted plate armour, and thus are
        extraordinarily difficult to defeat in combat.

    Ettin - Travelers in the forests of our land have oft been fooled into
        thinking they have drawn near to a group of fellow explorers when
        they encounter an Ettin, for these two-headed monstrosities have
        been known to carry on heated discussions with themselves.  An
        Ettin invariably abandons its dialogue when it hath the chance to
        attack an adventurer.

    Gelatinous Cube - Called 'dungeon sweeper' by some, the Gelatinous Cube
        is a subterranean dweller that roams corridors in search of food.
        Their bodies are composed of a clear, corrosive, jelly-like
        substance which renders them difficult to see, but they may
        sometimes be detected by the remnants of armour or debris contained
        within them.  They are omnivores, digesting anything they find
        after absorbing it into their massive bodies.  Contact with a
        Gelatinous Cube hath ruined the armour of many a hardy warrior.

    Gremlins - Mischievous kin of the trolls and lizard men, Gremlins are
        underground creatures of  voracious appetite.  A favorite diversion
        is to stealthily approach unwary travelers and pilfer their food
        rations.  Many an adventurer had been consigned to death by
        starvation below the surface of Sosaria as a result of the antics
        of these creatures.

    Hood - When the corrupt influence of the unspeakable Mondain spread
        throughout the Realm, even some of our stalwart peasants fell under
        the sway of the evil wizard.  These warped individuals now roam the
        countryside attacking travelers.  While unskilled in the use of
        arms, they nonetheless pose quite a nuisance to adventurers.

    Invisible Seeker - Among the most dangerous of the denizens of the
        catacombs below our land is the Invisible Seeker.  None have ever
        seen one of these horrific slayers, for they are-as their name
        implies-unseeable.  Their presence is usually first detected when
        open wounds suddenly begin appearing on the body of a victim.  They
        are, however, susceptible to harm from most weapons.

    Knight - Like their forest-dwelling counterparts the Dark Knights, the
        predatory Knights of Sosaria are warriors who have forsaken the
        ways of Chivalry for the paths of Evil.  They are fierce opponents
        and must be treated with care if one is to avoid an untimely
        demise.

    Lich - The Lich is an evil spellcaster who, through the necromantic
        arts, hath entered a state of living death in order to prolong an
        unholy reign on earth.  Woe to the explorer who stumbles upon the
        lair of a lich, for the undead mage will guard its domain fiercely
        and attack without hesitation.



    Lizard Man - When Mondain first came to our land he performed
        unspeakable experiments with his servitors and the fierce reptiles
        that in habit some of the streams and rivers in the south of our
        land.  The result was the Lizard Man, a being both reptilian and
        human in a single body, armed with cruel teeth and a disposition to
        match its appearance.

    Mimic - Beware the treacherous Mimic, for it hath been the doom of many
        a dungeon explorer.  Disguised as a tempting treasure chest, the
        Mimic patiently awaits the overly-curious adventurer.  When the
        victim makes as if to examine the chest, the Mimic attacks with a
        ferocity unmatched.

    Mind Whipper - Truly hideous, the Mind Whipper is a being with the body
        of a human, a face that resembles nothing so much as the underside
        of a squid, and an unquenchable thirst for the mental energies of
        its victims.  The few who have survived encounters with Mind
        Whippers have emerged as babbling lunatics, their minds flayed from
        their souls by the relentless onslaught of these terrible
        creatures.

    Minotaur - As mentioned before, the evil Mondain experimented
        ceaselessly with the cross-breeding of man and beast in an effort
        to create the ultimate soldier.  As if the creation of the dreaded
        Lizard Man was not enough, the vile wizard also mated the famed
        Baratarian fighting bull with some of his followers, resulting in
        the Minotaur-a horror that walks on two legs like a man, but which
        has the head and the cruel horns of a bull.

    Necromancer - The Necromancer is a mage whose specialty is the practice
        of the arcane arts that pertain to the dead.  Practitioners of such
        a morbid specialty were naturally drawn to the fowl Mondain as
        jackals are to the carrion of the plains.

    Ness Creature - The seas surrounding Sosaria are home to a number of
        beasts, among which numbers the dread Ness Creature.  For many
        years these reptilian behemoths were thought to be naught but the
        workings of the over-wrought imaginations of mariners.  The sinking
        of the frigate Pembroke in plain view of a small armada hath
        disproven this belief.

    Orc - Small, pig-visage humanoids, the Orcs were the vanguard of
        Mondain's first advance.  Tribal by nature, they are sub-human at
        best, just a slight cut above true bestiality.  They abhor all
        things human and cultured and will lay waste to anything fashioned
        by human hands.  'Tis said that they relish the taste of human
        flesh.

    Pirates - The pirates that infest the coastal waters of Sosaria are the
        scourge of the honest mariner.  They ply the waterways seeking
        unarmed merchant ships to plunder, and often press the younger crew
        members into service as marauders.  Once engaged, a pirate vessel
        and its crew will battle to the end, seeking no quarter and
        offering none.



    Ranger - Alas!  Even the noble Ranger, preserver of the woodlands and
        keeper of the forests, hath fallen under the sway of dark Mondain!
        These matchless trailblazers long watched over the preserves of the
        Sosarian nobility, but as Mondain's treachery took hold, many of
        them forsook their old ways and became predators themselves.  He
        who is pursued by a Ranger must turn and make a stand, for once on
        a trail a Ranger will never give it up.

    Rat, Giant - The underground passages of the Realm are prowled by
        oversized rodents, the result of Mondain's necromancy and an
        abundance of food on the form of victims of the Evil One's minions.
        The Sosarian Giant Rat is a vicious predator and should not be
        taken lightly.

    Skeleton - The progeny of Necromancers and undead Liches, Skeletons are
        the animated corpses of dead warriors from which the flesh hath
        withered and fallen away.  They fight tirelessly in an effort to
        carry out the bidding of their dark masters.

    Spider, Giant - Few moments hold more terror for the intrepid explorer
        than when a Giant Spider, venom dripping from its fangs, is
        encountered in the corridor of a subterranean labyrinth.  These
        creatures are dazzling in their agility and tireless in their
        search for prey.  Fight well, or face a paralyzing sting and the
        fate of becoming a living hatchery for their young.

    Squid, Giant - Sosarian mariners swap legends of the Kraken, or Giant
        Squid, in every pub in every port of the Realm.  These monstrous
        creatures have been known to rise from the ocean depths, seize a
        vessel in their long tentacles, and drag the hapless vessel and its
        crew to a watery grave in the space of but a half-dozen heartbeats.

    Tangler - Looking for all the world as naught but a vine-covered tree
        stump, the Tangler lurks in subterranean corridors, waiting to
        ensnare explorers of the underground.  Once a Tangler hath enmeshed
        an adventurer in its tentacles, it will hold the victim fast until
        starvation ends the struggle.  The monstrosity then feasts on the
        corpse.

    Thief - Long before the coming of Mondain, the common cutpurse was a
        plague to travelers in Sosaria.  Lurking in alleyways, poised
        behind trees, and skulking in dungeon corridors, these villains are
        always ready to relieve innocent citizens of their valuables and
        their lives.  'Tis a service to your fellow Sosarian to exterminate
        a Thief whenever possible.

    Trent - Native to the woodlands of Sosaria, the evil Trent seems like
        an ordinary oak tree until one approaches near enough to be
        ensnared in the grasp of its plaint branches.  Once it hath crushed
        the life from the victim, the Trent then devours it, leaving no
        trace of its prey to warn other travelers.



    Viper - Since before the dawn of civilization, the race of serpents
        hath roamed the land.  From the most harmless garden snake to the
        giant constrictors, these legless creatures have always inspired
        fear in the human race.  In the case of the Viper, this fear is
        well-founded.  These vicious reptiles strike fiercely and
        frequently at all who stray too closely.  Their venom-laden fangs
        bring a swift yet painful death.

    Wandering Eyes - Many a dungeon seeker hath been startled to enter a
        darkened chamber and be greeted by a number of eyes staring out of
        the murky blackness.  Stare not long, for the Wandering Eyes weave
        a hypnotic spell that entrances event he most strong-willed and
        leaves one helpless before the magical onslaught that inevitably
        follows mesmerization.

    Warlock - Rogue practitioners of the magical arts, Warlocks are the
        evil servitors of Mondain.  The Foul One hath trained them in the
        casting of bolts of mystic energy and sent them forth to wreak
        havoc among the populace.  Slay them if yea can, for the arcane
        arts should never be used for wicked purpose.

    Wraith - Summoned from the nethermost regions of Hell by Mondain's
        perverse enchantments, Wraiths are the restless souls of dead
        clerics.  Once on the material plane, they drift about seeking
        potential 'converts' to the discipline of Evil.  Since one must
        first die in order to be converted, 'tis strongly advised that
        their enticements be resisted.

    Zorn - Little is known of the mysterious Zorn.  'Tis a creature that
        not only defies logic, but that seems to defy the very laws of
        nature.  It can burrow through anything and is completely
        omnivorous.  In battle it seems to generate far more force than one
        would estimate possible from a creature of its size.  When slain,
        the Zorn quickly evaporates, thus none have ever been studied
        closely.













               I, Lord British, would like to thank the following
                persons for their efforts in creating this work.

                Special thanks goes out to those who spent many
                  arduous months programming this new version:

                   Dav Holle as lead programmer and team man-
                   ager; Dr. Cat, Steve Meuse, Dallas Snell,
                   John Miles and Richard Garriott for their
                             brilliant programming
                                    efforts.

                   Dave Albert for the product management and
                           eloquent writings herein.

               Denis R. Loubet for the magnificent illustrations
                  within this book and to Lori Ogwulu for her
                     outstanding graphicd and design work.

                And to all those persons found within this game,
                            I extend warm greetings.

                       Copyright 1980 by Richard Garriott
                     Copyright 1986 by Origin Systems, Inc.
                              and Richard Garriott
                          136 Harvey Road Building 'B'
                             Londonderry, NH  03103

               Ultima and Lord British are Registered Trademarks
                              of Richard Garriott
