Ultima 1 guide
by Spoony
Version 1.0 
Copyright © 2004 Spoony

-This guide may not be reproduced in any form, partially or wholly, without written permission of the author.
-This guide, if reproduced, must remain in UNALTERED .txt format, and may not appear with any type of 
advertisement, including but not limited to ad banners, pop-up winows, within frames displaying 
advertisements, or in any kind of publication.
-I am not to be held responsible for damages resulting from this file or its contents.
-The most up-to-date version of this guide is available at http://killass.lardpirates.com. Check this version 
of the file before e-mailing with questions or comments.
-By making use of this file or its contents, you agree to the terms stated in the above disclaimer.
-Please do not e-mail me about subjects not specifically covered by the FAQ itself; if the guide covers 
multiplayer strategy, for example, I probably won't be able to help you on the single-player missions.

This guide covers the remake of Ultima 1 that appears on the Ultima Collection, so there may be some 
differences from other versions of the game.

---
Helpful links
---

Ultima I tends to run too quickly on newer computers, making it nearly unplayable.  Fortunately, there is a 
program called Moslo that fixes this issue, it is downloadable from http://www.hpaa.com/moslo/.

There is a bug in the Ultima Collection version of the game that can cause the screen to 
go black-and-white or garble on certain computers.  A patch for this exists 
at http://www.ultimainfo.net/Downloads/U1patch.zip

---
Character Creation
---

Your character begins with ten points in each of their stats, and you will get another 30 points to 
distribute among them.  You cannot start with more than 25 in any one stat.

Gender

Gender does not affect your character's stats in Ultima 1, so choose whichever.

Race bonuses

Human  - +5  Intelligence
Elf    - +5  Agility
Dwarf  - +5  Strength
Bobbit - +10 Wisdom, -5 Strength

Class bonuses

Fighter - +10 Strength, +10 Agility
Cleric  - +10 Wisdom
Wizard  - +10 Intelligence
Thief   - +10 Agility

Stats

Strength - Determines damage done by your attacks
Agility - Determines attack accuracy and attack evasion, as well as stealing ability
Stamina - Reduces damage from attacks
Charisma - Lowers selling prices in shops
Wisdom - Increases the reliability of offensive spells and lowers spell prices
Intelligence - Lowers buying prices of vehicles, weapons and armor in shops and increases the damage 
offensive spells inflict

Overview

The Fighter is far and away the best class choice, as you get a lot of points in two important stats with no 
downside.  However, the advantage to using a Wizard is that you get some spells that no other class can use.  
Thieves and Clerics are largely useless.

---
Keyboard Commands
---

Press the first letter of the description to perform that action.

A ttack with a weapon.  You must specify a direction to attack in if you are on the overworld map.

B oard a horse, frigate, or other vehicle.

C ast a spell.  You must first memorize the spell with the Ready command to use it.

D rop an unwanted item while in a castle or town.  You cannot get the item back if you drop it, so be sure 
you want to get rid of it.

E nter a town, castle, signpost, or dungeon.

F ire a vehicle's weapons.  You must specify which direction to fire in.

G et an adjacent object.

H yperjump to another sector when in your spaceship.

I nform and Search.  This lets you know of the name of a landmark you are about to enter, the continent you 
are currently on, and brings up the sector map when you are in space.  Finally, it will allow you to search 
for hidden doors if you are in a dungeon.

K limb up or down a ladder in dungeons.

N oise on or off.  Toggles in-game sound.

O pens a coffin in a dungeon.

Q uit and save your game.  You won't be able to use this to exit the program in the DOS version, you must 
reset the computer or close the DOS window to do that.

R eady a weapon, armor, or spell in your inventory for use.

S teal from shop counters or storerooms in castles.  Be prepared to run if you're caught!

T ransact business with merchants or kings.

U nlock jail cells (with the key) or chests in dungeons.

V iew change when in ship from first-person to an overhead view and vice-versa.

X-it a vehicle and travel on foot.

Z tats.  This brings up your statistics menu.

Space - Passes your current turn.

Arrow Keys- Moves your character around.

J,M,P,W - Do nothing in this game.

---
Weapons
---

This is a list of the weapons, which get progressively stronger as you go down the list.  Their prices vary 
depending upon your character's Intelligence.

Dagger
Mace        
Axe         
Rope and Spikes*
Sword       
Great Sword 
Bow and Arrow (Ranged)
Amulet*
Wand*
Staff*
Triangle*
Pistol (Ranged)
Light Sword
Phazor (Ranged)
Blaster (Ranged)

*When I tried to attack with these weapons, the game simply gave me a message saying "Attack with (item)?" 
instead of performing an attack. Do these weapons have another use besides combat?  Because they certainly 
aren't useful there...

Also note that the Triangle, Pistol, Light Sword, Phazor, and Blaster cannot be bought in shops.  They can 
only be found via a signpost, or stolen from castles.

---
Armor
---

This is a list of the types of armor in the game.  The prices of these items are affected by Intelligence.  
Listed in order from worst to best.

Leather
Chain
Plate
Vacuum 
Reflect

Vacuum and Reflect suits will allow you to survive in space, so be sure to get one of those before riding the 
shuttle.

---
Items
---

Gems - You'll need one of each color (Red, Blue, Yellow and Green) to finish the time machine.
Keys - You need one to free the princesses in the various castles.  They are carried by the castle jesters.

---
Spells
---
Spells can be purchased in town, from the shops.  Their selling price is influenced by Wisdom.  Also note 
that you must ready the spell you wish to use before you can cast it.

Ladder Down - Creates a ladder leading down one floor in a dungeon
Ladder Up - Creates a ladder leading up one floor in a dungeon
Magic Missile - Damages a foe, does more damage depending on your statistics and equipment.
Open - Opens a coffin without risking setting off any traps.
Prayer - Calls upon a variety of random effects, which may be beneficial or harmful to you.  Only use this as 
a last resort!
Unlock - Unlocks a chest without risking setting off any traps.

Wizard-only spells

Blink - Teleports you randomly upon the current dungeon level
Create - Makes a wall of magical force in front of you to block off enemies
Destroy - Destroys a magical wall in front of you, allowing you to pass through.
Kill - Instantly destroys one enemy.

---
Vehicles
---

A list of the game's vehicles.  Selling price is, again, affected by Intelligence.

Vehicle       Traversable Terrain

Foot          Plains, woods
Horse         Plains, woods
Cart          Plains, woods
Raft          Sea
Frigate       Sea
Air car       Plains, Sea
Shuttle       Space*
Time Machine  None**

Rafts and Frigates can only be bought in coastal towns.
Frigates and Air Cars can fire their on-board weapons (cannons and lasers respectively) to damage enemies.  
Each has a range of three squares.
All space shuttles are equipped with laser beams for zapping enemy spacecraft.

*If you blast into space without a Vacuum or Reflect suit equipped you'll die, so be sure one of those is 
equipped before you get in your shuttle.
**Using this craft when you have all four gems will teleport you to the final fight with Mondain.

---
Spaceships
---

Ship       Fuel    Shield    Notes

Shuttle    1000    1000      This is the only ship that can safely re-enter Sosaria.  It is not suited for 
combat.
Fighter 1  5000    1000      The larger of the two fighters, this one holds more fuel but has weak shields.
Fighter 2  2500    5000      The smaller of the two fighters, this one has less fuel but much more shielding.

---
Lands
---

Ultima 1

The four lands are arranged like this:
      
    British   <--->   Feudal Lords

       ^                    ^
       |                    |
       |                    |
       v                    v

 Dark Unknown <---> Danger and Despair

Thus, if you go east of the Lands of British you will end up in the Feudal Lands, and if you go out the top 
of Lands of British you will 'wrap around' to the Dark Unknown area, etc.

Detailed maps of these four areas can be found at the Ultima 1 Archive at RPGclassics, located here:
http://www.rpgclassics.com/shrines/pc/ultima1/overworld.shtml

---
Signposts
---

The only way to boost most of your stats is to visit signposts.  You can visit each one as many times as you 
like, but you will not get any points if you visit the same one twice in a row - you will have to travel to 
another signpost first, then return to the first one to get more points or weapons from it.

Signpost Name           Effect                 Locaton

Pillar of Protection    +10% to Agility        Lands of Lord British
Tower of Knowledge      +10% to Intelligence   Lands of Lord British
The Sign Post           +10% to Stamina        Lands of the Dark Unknown 
Southern Sign Post      +10% to Charisma       Lands of the Dark Unknown 
Grave of the Lost Soul  +10% to Stamina        Lands of Danger and Despair
Eastern Sign Post       None                   Lands of Danger and Despair
Pillar of the Argonauts Get Weakest Weapon*    Lands of the Feudal Lords
Pillar of Ozymandias    +10% to Wisdom         Lands of the Feudal Lords

*You will get the weakest weapon that is not in your inventory.  So, for example, if you had all the weapons 
up to the Triangle, you would receive the Pistol if you visited this signpost.

---
Guide
---

Ultima I is a pretty non-linear game, so I can't really write a direct walkthrough for it.  However, I can 
tell you of the quests you'll need to finish in order to complete the game.

You begin near Lord British's castle, with very little money, HP, and Food.  We'll have to do something about 
that.  Go into town and buy some basic weapons and armor (I believe that you're limited to Daggers, Maces, 
and Leather at the beginning), some food, and spend whatever you have left on HP from Lord British.  If 
you've got reasonably high Agility you can try stealing some better weapons and armor from LB's castle (you 
have a chance of getting Reflect Suits and Blasters), but it is risky because you will have to either outrun 
or fight the guards if you are caught, neither of which has a high chance of survival at this point in the 
game.

At this point, you should visit the kings in the area, Lord British and the Lost King.  Each will give you a 
quest:

Lord British: Find the Grave of the Lost Soul
Lost King: Kill a Gelatinous Cube

LB's quest requires a ship or an aircar, which you probably don't have the money for at this point.  Don't 
worry about it now, just find a dungeon and enter.  Fight enemies in there until you gain a decent amount of 
experience points and gold, then exit.  You will gain HP upon exiting the dungeon depending upon how many 
enemies you fought.  After fighting enemies for a while, you should have enough money to upgrade your weapons 
and armor, do so.

Now stop by the magic shop in town and buy a few Ladder Down and Ladder Up spells.  Enter any dungeon and get 
down to the fourth floor by any means possible (either take the ladders down, or make some with your 
spells).  Find and kill a Gelatinous Cube (they are square-shaped, and can be somewhat difficult to discern 
from the halls of the dungeon at first).  Once you've done this, you'll have completed the Lost King's 
quest.  Return to him for your reward, a Red Gem.

You should be able to afford an aircar or frigate right now; if not, go kill more enemies in the dungeon 
until you can.  Head over to the land of Danger and Despair (by going either Northwest or Southeast) and find 
the Grave, which will boost your stamina and complete another quest.  Return to LB's castle for a reward.

From here, you should be able to manage on your own.  Just be sure to stop by any signposts you come across 
for statistic boosts, stop by towns and castles to buy food, equipment, and HP as necessary, and complete the 
rest of the quests that the kings give you.

Be sure to stop by the Pillar of the Argonauts frequently (you can simply fly back and forth between it and 
the nearby Pillar of Ozymandias) until you get the Blaster, the game's best weapon. 

If you need maps of the four continents, they are available at this link:
http://www.rpgclassics.com/shrines/pc/ultima1/overworld.shtml

---

Here is a list of the rest of the quests.

Feudal Lords

Castle Rondorin - Kill a Carrion Creeper (found on fifth or sixth floor of any dungeon) (Reward: Green Gem)
Castle Bratara - Find the Southern Signpost

Dark Unknown

Black Dragon - Kill a Lich (found on the seventh or eighth floor of any dungeon) (Reward: Yellow Gem)
Olympus - Find the Pillar of the Argonauts

Danger and Despair

Shamino - Kill a Balron (found in the ninth or tenth floor of any dungeon) (Reward: nine items from his 
storeroom*)
White Dragon - Find the Tower of Knowledge (Reward: Blue Gem)

* You can use "Steal" nine times in the storerooms without a chance of being caught.  After that, you're fair 
game again.

---

One of the kings will mention that a princess will help a 'space ace' travel time to defeat Mondain.  So, it 
looks like you'll have to become that space ace.  Buy a shuttle from any town, make sure you have plenty of 
money to spare (2500 or so would be good) and fly into space.  Park your shuttle at the space station (get 
the nose of the shuttle right into the opening on one end of the station) and take one of the other two 
instead; their fuel and shields will last a lot longer than the shuttle's.

Now just Hyperspace to enemy-filled sectors (marked with "H" on the map) and zap as many enemies as you can 
by targeting them with the cursor and pressing the Fire button.  However, only try to fire or move when 
you're sure you'll hit, as every time you fire the laser or move it will cost fuel.  You can stop by the 
space stations (marked on the map with a plus sign) to refuel or change ships as necessary. Docking will cost 
you 500 coins though, hence why you brought all that extra money along.

Once you've zapped twenty enemies (hitting them can be tricky, it seems to help if you aim for the upper half 
of the ship), the game will tell you that you've become a Space Ace, so you won't have to fly around and zap 
things anymore.  Return to Sosaria, switch back to the shuttle, and land back on the planet.

Now that you're a space ace, you have a princess to rescue.  Not any specific princess, mind you, just one of 
them.  Enter a castle.  Remember the jester who constantly shouts that he has the key?  Kill him and take it, 
then rush over to the locked cells in the castle and free the princess.  (Sometimes the key won't work 
though, in which case you'll have to blast your way out of the castle and try again).  When it does work, 
just make your way to the doorway, princess in tow and most likely through a bunch of guards.  She'll tell 
you about the time machine's whereabouts; it is near one of the signposts.

If you haven't done so already, get the Blaster (either by stealing or via the Argonauts signpost) and a 
Reflect Suit, and sell all of your extra weapons and armor for cash.  Spend all the money you have on Hit 
Points until you have at least 7000.  Once that's done, and provided you have all four of the gems, head on 
over to the time machine and start it up.

You should now be in the distant past, where Mondain is busy making the Gem of Immortality.  That's certainly 
not good, so zap him with your blaster until he turns into a bat, then just chase after him and keep blasting 
him whenever he gets in range.  Once you get the message "is he dead?" walk up to the gem and destroy it with 
the Attack command.  This will cost you a lot of HP, but you should win the game immediately afterward.  If 
you don't, walk up to Mondain and zap him some more until he finally dies.

---
Hints and tidbits
---

-Areas marked with a diamond on the space map contain a sun (though this has no practical use), and empty 
areas are marked with three dots.

-You can steal weapons, armor and food from the castles (up to and including the Blaster and Reflect Suit).  
This is risky however, as you'll have to avoid guards if you are caught.  But you can potentially get the 
best gear in the game at the very beginning, making your travels a lot easier.

-The 'kill the monsters' quests can be difficult, as there are very strong monsters on the lower levels of 
each dungeon and you'll have to fight through a lot of them just to get to the floor you need to go to.  You 
can, however, make this easier by bringing plenty of Ladder Up/Down spells.  Just skip straight to the level 
you need to reach with Ladder Down, kill the baddie, and then return to the surface with Ladder Up.

---
Closing
---

Thanks to the help file on the Ultima Collection CD, Plaid Dragon's walkthrough, and RPGclassics.

Questions, comments and corrections can be sent to spoonicusAN71SP4M@lardpirates.com, without the AN71SP4M.